[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hello and welcome
to "Gaiam Inspirations."
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
We're coming to you live
from Boulder, Colorado,
here at the Gaiam
studios in Boulder.
And since this is a
live, interactive show,
I encourage you to communicate
with us through Facebook
and Twitter and all
sorts of different ways
so that we can hear from
you throughout the show.
You're going to
have an opportunity
to ask the doctor some questions
throughout the show as well.
So keep connecting with us
through Facebook and Twitter.
So today we're
talking about pain
and the number of
natural remedies
that there are for pain
control and pain relief.
There are many, many different
remedies, as a matter of fact,
about 50 plus that Dr.
Shealy is aware of.
And my guest today
is Dr. Norm Shealy.
He's a neuroscientist.
He's the founder of the American
Holistic Medical Association.
And he created the TENS unit,
the Transcutaneous Electrical
Nerve Stimulation device--
I got that out [LAUGHS]--
45 years ago.
So if there is a person
on this planet that
knows about pain control,
it's Doctor Shealy.
Thank you so much
for joining me.
>>DR. NORM SHEALY: Oh,
It's pleasure, Lisa.
>>LISA: It's great
to have you here.
So tell us a little
bit about-- I mentioned
50 plus different types of pain
remedy or pain control devices
that you have.
>>SHEALY: Well, I mean, we could
go back centuries, of course,
to certain things like
acupuncture and acupressure.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>SHEALY: And mental
things that developed
from some of the ancient
mental techniques that became
hypnosis and self-hypnosis.
And then, of
course, acupressure.
>>LISA: Why did so
many of those things
get deleted from the
medical community?
>>SHEALY: Because
they don't make money
for the Pharmaca Mafia.
[LAUGHS] Sorry.
>>LISA: It's truly stated.
So basically they're
not profitable.
>>SHEALY: It's right.
In general, if it can't
make a huge profit,
nobody's interested.
>>LISA: This is true
about herbs and all sorts
of different things.
>>SHEALY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SHEALY: On the
other hand, I believe
that we should do all
the natural, simple,
and safe things.
If it's not safe,
I'm not interested.
>>LISA: Very good.
No, that's very clear.
And as your-- with your vast
experience as a neurosurgeon,
you know exactly what
works and what doesn't.
I like the fact that
you come at this
from a scientific
perspective and you
do studies and research and
clinical studies as well.
>>SHEALY: Well, there should
be an outcome of anything.
And a lot of the
modern things that
are being used alternatively
haven't been adequately
studied yet.
But you know, I've
done several studies
on homeopathy--
phenomenal sometimes.
In fact, I published
a paper on the use
of homeopathic preparation
for osteoarthritic knee pain,
which is better than Tylenol.
>>LISA: You're kidding.
>>SHEALY: No.
>>LISA: Through homeopathy.
See, that's really wonderful.
And this is why you're
here, is to share with us
some of the devices,
some of the techniques,
just a glimpse into your world.
And my idea here is just
to get this information
into the awareness of
people so that they
can start to make
choices and have
different decisions,
different options, available.
So here is a little bit
of the demonstration.
This is the updated, improved
times a million TENS unit,
isn't it?
>>SHEALY: That's correct.
This is the one
that-- actually, it's
the only one I put
my own name on.
This puts out human
DNA frequency,
54 to 78 billion
cycles per second
at a billionth of a watt,
which is 1,000 times
below any risk factor.
That's how safe it is.
>>LISA: OK, so it's
extremely-- less, of course,
less invasive than a
cellphone would be.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
And when you put this on
specific acupuncture points,
it recharges that system.
>>LISA: So specific
acupuncture points
that have to do with whatever
you're needing to remedy.
>>SHEALY: Whatever you're doing.
When I visited the Ukraine
about 16 years ago,
at the Endocrinology
Institute they
were treating diabetes only
by putting these frequencies
into Hoku, these two points.
At the Cardiology
Institute, where
there were 420 cardiologists
in one building,
they were treating angina
pectoris, heart pain,
only by putting it
through these two points.
Because this is the
strongest point in the body.
>>LISA: Why is this the
strongest point in the body?
>>SHEALY: Well,
energetically, it
has more connections
than any other point.
>>LISA: In the hands.
>>SHEALY: Yeah.
Well remember, you have
more-- in your brain,
more space for the thumbs than
any other part of the body.
>>LISA: So that the largest part
of the brain, inside the brain,
the development of the brain--
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
>>LISA: --operates
the opposable thumbs?
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
I mean, this-- what
distinguishes people
from all other known animals
is the use of the thumb.
>>LISA: And so this is
where most of our nerves
are related to
functions of body?
>>SHEALY: Well, it's the one
that has more connections.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: And it just
has, because there's
more space up here
in the brain, there's
more connections with
the rest of the body.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
OK.
So this particular unit, you
use human-- the frequency
of the actual person
that's using the device.
>>SHEALY: Well, all of us
have the same frequency,
a random 54 to 78 billion
cycles per second.
And we don't lose that
frequency until we're dead.
We lose the strength of it.
And so this is like recharging
the battery of your cells.
>>LISA: How long does it take
to do something like that?
>>SHEALY: Oh, depending
on what you're doing,
three minutes for an acupuncture
point, a pair of points.
And most of the circuits don't
last more than 21 minutes,
18 to 21 minutes.
>>LISA: And do you use
this device yourself?
>>SHEALY: Of course.
>>LISA: Every day?
>>SHEALY: Well, no, because
I have other things.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Yeah, I know.
We're going to get
into the other things.
He has an amazing
amount of-- all right.
So this one is the Relax Mate.
>>SHEALY: Yeah, this
is for relaxation.
>>LISA: So this is rejuvenation?
>>SHEALY: It's for
stress reduction.
This is for people who
can't turn their mind off.
Within five minutes,
90% of people
are in deep, deep relaxation.
>>LISA: So this is for anxiety.
This is--
>>SHEALY: It assists with sleep.
In fact, for people
who are depressed,
I use the other device we're
going to talk about plus this.
And between the
two of them, we get
85% of people out of depression
within two weeks without drugs.
>>LISA: What about grief?
>>SHEALY: Grief-- we go back
to the other stimulator.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: It would
be much better
to use the transcranial
stimulator and the one
we're going to talk
about later, Bliss.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: I found that--
myself in the past year
have dealt with that.
And it was wonderful.
>>LISA: So it really
has assisted you.
>>SHEALY: Oh, heavens, yes.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>SHEALY: I've used this
more in the last year
than I have in the
previous 30 years.
>>LISA: And I know that you
lost a loved one this last year.
And to find something
that has actually
helped you be in
this great state
and help other people
still is wonderful.
>>SHEALY: Oh, yeah.
It's phenomenal.
And I'm getting reports
all over the country
from people doing this.
>>LISA: That's great.
That is wonderful.
So this is?
>>SHEALY: This is called
the LISS Cranial Electrical
Stimulator.
This you apply to the head
for an hour in the morning.
And it has to be
finished before noon.
And it raises your serotonin
and your beta endorphin
for the whole day and sets
you back into a normal rhythm.
This alone will get 50% of
people out of depression
within two weeks
without drugs, safely.
And there's not an
antidepressant drug
in the world that's
better than 42%,
and they have complications.
No complications with this.
>>LISA: That-- [LAUGHS]-- I
don't think there's much more
that needs to be said other
than the fact that what is
the response that you've
received from the people,
the clinical response.
>>SHEALY: Oh, some
people come out
of depression
within a day or two.
>>LISA: Is that circumstantial
or is that chemical?
>>SHEALY: Oh, yeah.
Oh, it's chemical.
Because this strongly
raises serotonin.
See, most people with depression
are low in serotonin and beta
endorphin, the natural narcotic.
So both of those come up within
20 minutes after you-- in fact,
we not only proved
it in the blood,
we actually did spinal
taps and measured it
in the cerebral spinal fluid.
I was the first
subject, of course.
>>LISA: Oh my gosh.
>>SHEALY: I'm an
experiential junkie.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] You must be
to do something like that.
Well, that's amazing.
That is amazing technology.
And I know at your institute,
at the Shealy Institute,
you have this times-- a
lot more elaborate devices
that are at the
actual institute.
>>SHEALY: We have
a great playpen.
[BOTH LAUGH]
>>LISA: You call that a playpen.
My goodness.
Actually, I want to share
some of this with you,
some of the photos that
Dr. Shealy has here.
All right.
What are we looking at here?
This is at your location, right?
>>SHEALY: This the Baytar.
This is a vibratory music bed.
10 speakers in the bed itself
and another 10 around the room.
And this makes you
so deeply relaxed.
It raises beta endorphin.
It allows people who are
depressed to bring it
up and get it out.
And it's just fabulous.
Actually, one night
in a snowstorm,
I decided to sleep on it.
After three hours,
I was so energized
I couldn't stay up any longer.
>>LISA: And where you
going to go in a snowstorm?
So does this have
anything in the mattress
other than the speakers?
>>SHEALY: That's all.
Just the music.
One of our students has done
her research on live blood,
looking at it under
the microscope.
And it markedly decreases the
ability of the blood to clot.
>>LISA: Really?
>>SHEALY: Yeah,
just by feeling it.
>>LISA: So it
increases circulation.
>>SHEALY: Yeah, feeling the
music as well as hearing it.
>>LISA: Now you
mentioned you had
another one that
had crystals in it.
>>SHEALY: Ah, OK.
Now, that's the Rejuvamatrix.
That was for rejuvenating,
regrowing, telomeres.
Average telomere,
the tips of your DNA,
those little double
strand things,
those are what allow the
cell to reproduce itself
every seven years or less.
>>LISA: Reproduce healthy cells.
>>SHEALY: Right.
But ordinarily, you lose
1% every year of life.
And using the bed that has a
copper screen in the middle
with a pound of crushed
sapphire crystal on it
connected to a Tesla
coil, we actually
are regrowing telomeres.
Our best one is a
50-year-old woman
whose telomeres grew
30.8% in two years.
>>LISA: How do you measure that?
>>SHEALY: With a blood test.
>>LISA: OK
>>SHEALY: We send it off
to a lab in Vancouver.
>>LISA: OK.
So now, the copper,
does it somehow
activate the crystal
through the cord?
>>SHEALY: Yes.
>>LISA: How does that work?
>>SHEALY: Well, I
have to tell you.
The reason this came is I got
an intuitive knowledge years ago
that crushed
sapphire would bypass
the need for bypass surgery.
Well, I'm not a cardiologist.
So I just decided to put
it in the Rejuvamatrix
because heart disease
is still the number one
cause of recycling.
>>LISA: Right.
[LAUGHS] Nicely said.
>>SHEALY: So I figured
everybody can use it.
>>LISA: Yes
>>SHEALY: And that's
why the crushed sapphire
is there, amplifies
the frequency.
>>LISA: And what
does the copper do?
>>SHEALY: Well, it allows
these human DNA frequencies,
54 to 78 billion,
to be everywhere.
You're in a field
that's about this deep.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>SHEALY: Your whole
body is bathed in them.
And you absorb them
through the skin.
>>LISA: And you mentioned
there was a cord that also--
>>SHEALY: The Tesla coil
is an electrical device
that activates the copper.
>>LISA: Fascinating,
fascinating.
All right.
Wow.
This is amazing.
This is, again, all about the
amazing amount of technology
and resources out there in order
to reduce pain and depression.
There are many.
This is just a glimpse.
What is this one?
>>SHEALY: Oh, now that's
the gold iodide bed.
There's one ton of
gold iodide crystals
in that bed under that mat.
>>LISA: You can't
take that everywhere.
>>SHEALY: And this is-- no.
[BOTH LAUGH]
This is pure yin energy,
this total relaxation.
And we have another
similar bed that
has one ton of mica crystal,
pure yang energy, for energy.
>>LISA: So it's sleeping
on a bed of crystal.
>>SHEALY: Sleeping
>>LISA: For how long
do you sleep there?
>>SHEALY: Oh, you can sleep
all night on that safely.
20 minutes is enough to
make a huge difference
physiologically.
We've measured all
kinds of changes.
>>LISA: What does it do exactly?
>>SHEALY: Well, it
reduces stress, basically.
Without any thinking, without
having to do anything,
it just-- you know.
>>LISA: It reduces
your stress, but what
about effects of prior stress?
>>SHEALY: Well, all
emotional disorders
are largely the result
of anxiety and fear.
And so by reducing the
physiological response to that,
it can be tremendously helpful.
>>LISA: True.
Absolutely true.
OK.
That's amazing.
It doesn't look like a
very comfortable bed, but--
>>SHEALY: Well, it's not
on an angle like that.
It is flat. [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: It's good.
It hasn't got four posters.
I don't know.
>>SHEALY: This is
one of my favorites.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
>>SHEALY: This is one
ton of quartz crystal.
>>LISA: Where do you get this?
>>SHEALY: Oh, from Mt.
Ida, Arkansas.
[LAUGHS] I built it.
But I had this
idea 30 years ago,
and we only built
it 10 years ago.
And so the entire walls and
ceiling are pure quartz.
You walk in there, I mean,
within seconds you feel wow,
oh yeah.
And it just totally
takes away-- I
feel as if I'm in another
dimension in there.
>>LISA: Where do
you get the idea
to build a room made
out of quartz crystal?
>>SHEALY: Well,
I have a lot of--
>>LISA: Most people would put it
on their fingers or something.
>>SHEALY: [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Where do
you get this idea?
>>SHEALY: It just came to me.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: All my ideas
come out of the cosmos.
>>LISA: And then you actually
have to execute them.
>>SHEALY: Well, that's right.
>>SHEALY: That's a lot of
structure to build there.
>>SHEALY: Well, yeah, that
took a little construction,
but five of us did it in a week.
>>LISA: A little bit.
OK, and what is this one?
>>SHEALY: Now that is
a hot tub surrounded
by six tons of mica crystal.
All the way down to the floor
around that entire hot tub
is mica crystal,
which re-energizes.
If you take the water that has
been imprinted by the mica,
not in the tub, but around
it, and put it in grass seed
and compare it with plain water,
in one week the grass grows
20% more weight-- cut it
all off and measure it--
than plain water.
>>LISA: Because all the water
is in its perfect formation?
>>SHEALY: It has been energized.
>>LISA: Most likely?
>>SHEALY: Yeah.
You have an affinity with
crystal, I might say.
>>SHEALY: [LAUGHS]
I do love crystal.
>>LISA: Why is that?
>>SHEALY: Well, we
are crystalline.
I mean, you are a giant
quartz-like crystal.
Your bones, your muscles,
your tendons, and even
your intestines
are piezoelectric,
which means that any physical
pressure, including-- put
your hand on top of
your head and just hum.
[BOTH HUM]
Feel it?
>>LISA: Mhm.
>>SHEALY: Your entire
body is getting that.
So when you talk, your skeleton
is being imprinted by it,
because it converts
pressure into electricity.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>SHEALY: So each of us is
a giant quartz-like crystal.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Operating constantly
in that circuitry.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
And remember, quartz can
send, receive, and store
electromagnetic energy.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
The right kind.
>>SHEALY: Of course.
>>LISA: Can it defend against
the wrong kind as well?
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
If you prime it properly.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
OK.
So now speaking of
priming it properly,
we're going to do
some techniques here,
some exercises you guys
can do along with us
that you can do at home, you
can do right now, yourself,
that are completely cost
effective because they're free.
[LAUGHS] And so these
are different ways
that you-- these are tapping
on various meridian points
that Dr. Shealy is going
to show us in order
to stimulate natural hormonal
production, various chemicals
in the body.
What's the first one?
>>SHEALY: Let's start with
fire, because fire-- most people
are losing fire from burnout.
>>LISA: Yes, burnout.
>>SHEALY: And so there
are 12 specific points
which, when stimulated, raise
DHEA primarily, but also
testosterone in men, because
testosterone, of course,
can be made out of
DHEA ultimately.
>>LISA: And it's related to
energy and all sorts of things,
yes.
>>SHEALY: Health in
every conceivable way.
>>LISA: And DHEA is
responsible for--
>>SHEALY:
Dehydroepiandrosterone, DHEA,
is considered the
mother hormone.
There's more of it in the
body than any other hormone.
It is related to
your immune system,
to your health in general.
It is anti-inflammatory.
It's essential for good health.
You reach a peak
at age 25, average.
By age 30, most people
are already losing it.
By age 80, the vast
majority of people
have a DHEA less than 10%
of what they had at age 30.
>>LISA: So this is what
causes degeneration, disease.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: And so what we found
is a number of techniques.
But the first one
that was major was
stimulating the Ring of Fire.
So I'm going to
take my shoes off,
just so we can show it easily.
>>LISA: Try this at home, folks.
Try this at home.
>>SHEALY: We'll start.
This point right
here, if you come--
the long bone of the big toe.
Right there, there's a
joint, and of course you
want to do both of them.
>>LISA: Tapping on that.
And so the tapping sends the
electrical signal to the--
>>SHEALY: Right.
And that's all it takes.
I mean, that tapping has
activated those points.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Now--
>>LISA: Are you trying this?
OK.
>>SHEALY: Come up from
that to the pubic bone.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: And if you put your
finger in the belly button,
move around to the spine
and an inch off to the side,
this is Conception Vessel 2
and Bladder 22 on the left.
And so you tap those.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
>>SHEALY: Then you change
arms so your shoulder
doesn't get hurt.
And then you put a finger
just below the belly button
and to the right side.
So this is Conception Vessel
6 and Bladder 22 on the right.
And you tap those.
>>LISA: OK.
And this is great for
therapists, the people are--
>>SHEALY: And it's
energizing, instantly.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And now you move up.
And I generally
do these separate,
because you could do that,
but it's a little cumbersome.
So the Master of the Heart
6, called Paracardium 6
and something.
This is the control center for
the sympathetic-- adrenaline,
if you will-- system.
So this quiets it
down in this case.
So you want to get
that one quiet.
>>LISA: So if somebody's having
a heart arrhythmia or a rapid
heart rate--
>>SHEALY: Absolutely.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
>>SHEALY: Then you go up to what
I call the Frankenstein points,
just below the mastoid and
the hollow between the front
and back muscles,
right to the spine.
And you tap.
You feel the bone when
you go in deep enough.
>>LISA: These muscles
here are connected right
to the base of the spine?
>>SHEALY: You bet.
>>LISA: Wow.
Wonderful.
OK.
>>SHEALY: Then you go up
to the top of the head,
Governing Vessel 20.
Now you want to bring
the thyroid into it.
And you go just below that
little hump in the second rib
area.
>>LISA: And stimulate
that as well.
>>SHEALY: Right.
Now this takes the entire
endocrine system: gonads,
adrenal glands,
thyroid, pituitary.
>>LISA: And connects them
all so that they're--
>>SHEALY: And balances.
That's what we're
after is balance.
>>LISA: Balance and circulation.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
And in doing this,
actually, within 30 minutes,
your DHEA will begin to rise.
>>LISA: How long do we
tap on each one of the--
>>SHEALY: About as
long as I just showed.
>>LISA: OK.
And then how many times
a day do you do this?
>>SHEALY: Well, if you
had a major problem,
you'd want to do it twice a day.
>>LISA: That's it.
>>SHEALY: Yeah.
>>LISA: And how-- I mean,
you said major problem, but--
>>SHEALY: Well,
rheumatoid arthritis.
70% of patients who have
failed conventional medicine
do extremely well within
two weeks doing this.
>>LISA: Really?
>>SHEALY: Yeah.
>>LISA: Because that's one
of those diseases that is--
>>SHEALY: It's a
disease of fire.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>SHEALY: Diabetic
neuropathy, where
people are losing
sensation and having
a lot of pain in the feet.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SHEALY: 80%-- there's nothing
in medicine that comes close
to 80% of those people,
phenomenally better with this
circuit.
>>LISA: You're talking
about some incurables.
I mean, these are-- you're
bucking a lot of systems here.
>>SHEALY: Let's
talk about migraine.
People who are having
migraine once or twice a week.
>>LISA: Yes?
>>SHEALY: 75% reduction
in frequency and severity
of migraine by
tapping these points.
>>LISA: Because
you're a physician,
I mean, I ask you about the
clinical trials around this,
and for how long have
you done the research?
>>SHEALY: Well, the Ring of
Fire goes back about 15 years.
>>LISA: 15 years, wow.
>>SHEALY: And I've published
papers on all of these.
>>LISA: That's great.
No, that's enormous.
Facebook-- Kristen is asking
why don't more therapists
and psychologists recommend
these methods to treat
depression?
>>SHEALY: It's hard to know.
A psychologist, of
course, certainly
should be able to do it.
Unfortunately,
because of the FDA,
this does require
a prescription.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>SHEALY: But any
physician can prescribe it.
Any chiropractor
can prescribe it.
Any acupuncturist
>>LISA: Oh, they can?
OK.
>>SHEALY: Because
they're licensed
to use electrical gadgets.
>>LISA: All right.
So now these are the things
that can specifically
help with pain.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
What is one of the tapping
points of the circuits that
can help with pain
and depression?
>>SHEALY: Well, the other
one that I particularly
like is the Ring of Air.
The Ring of Air is
a 13-point system
that raises a neurochemical
called neurotensin,
which we produce in the brain.
Neurotensin is a pain reliever
and a tremendous mood reliever.
It also raises oxytocin, the
hormone that makes you feel--
>>LISA: The happy hormone.
>>SHEALY: --rapport and
love, nurturing, et cetera.
And we've published this.
We've demonstrated this.
And of course,
more recently I've
found that a very
powerful way of activating
this particular circuit is
applying specific essential oil
mixtures, which I
call Bliss, to the 13
points of the Ring of Air.
And you can do it
with your hands.
And I've demonstrated
this to thousands
of people in workshops.
And we'll have people, oh, yeah.
One guy said, it's
got street value!
[BOTH LAUGH]
>>LISA: OK, let's share them.
>>SHEALY: OK, here
you start at the tip
on the inside of
your big toenail.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: That's Spleen 1A.
Now that's not a traditional
acupuncture point.
Spleen 1 is the
base of the toenail.
1A is at the tip of the toenail.
And that's what I
was told to use.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
>>SHEALY: So then you go on
top of the foot to Liver 3.
>>LISA: Liver, OK.
>>SHEALY: Between the
big toe and the next toe,
but on the foot.
>>LISA: Spleen and Liver, OK.
>>SHEALY: Then you come
up the side of the shin
to the top of the calf--
shin bone, the tibia.
>>LISA: Are you
doing this at home?
>>SHEALY: Stomach 36.
>>LISA: We're doing
this at home, right?
OK.
>>SHEALY: Now, then you come
to the bottom of the spine.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Essentially
the tailbone area.
>>LISA: Yes, the spine.
OK.
>>SHEALY: And this is
where kundalini rises.
And then you come
to the very top,
because you want that energy
circulating all the way up.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>SHEALY: Now, then you
come under the collarbone,
right at the shoulder.
It should be very tender.
And you can do it this way.
>>LISA: Or one at at time?
>>SHEALY: Or one at a time.
You get a little more oomph
when you do it one at a time.
Then you go halfway across
the base of the skull.
There's a little
depression there
between tendinous attachments.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: That's Gallbladder 20.
And then--
>>LISA: My favorite point.
The top of the head,
activates everything.
>>SHEALY: Well, that's right.
It's over the pineal.
>>LISA: So I want to hear from
you via Facebook and Twitter.
Let me know if you tried that.
What is the response
that you're feeling?
What did that activate in you?
>>SHEALY: And when
we measure it,
it takes five-- well, when we
were doing it with oxytocin,
we waited 30 minutes.
You want to get good response.
And we've done the same
thing with the Ring of Fire,
20 to 30 minutes.
You've gotten a good increase.
>>LISA: Now, so that
one is specifically
for pain and depression.
>>SHEALY: And depression.
We've got hundreds
of people now who
are telling me that it's
taken care of their depression
for the first time in years.
>>LISA: Really?
Because depression
is definitely--
in your experience,
is it on the rise?
>>SHEALY: Oh, yeah.
40% of Americans are
clinically depressed.
>>LISA: 40%?
>>SHEALY: 40%.
>>LISA: That's almost
half of the people.
>>SHEALY: Another
40% have what I
call a sub-clinical
depressive miasma.
They're about that
far from depression.
>>LISA: Do they know?
>>SHEALY: Most of
them aren't aware.
They're just not happy.
>>LISA: Mhm.
Right.
>>SHEALY: And so all
of them can benefit
from something like this.
>>LISA: Do you know what's
causing that, overall?
>>SHEALY: Oh, yeah.
There's no question
it's poor self-esteem.
It started not later than
five or six years of age.
It all begins with how you
bond with your parents,
to be truthful.
So we now know that
oxytocin deficiency
is rampant and present in
autism, ADHD, depression,
anxiety, addiction, and
schizophrenia, among others.
>>LISA: OK, so that makes sense.
That absolutely makes sense.
Well, these are different
ways that you can really
start to experience this
and use these natural ways
of stimulating hormones,
oxytocin, DHEA that work
and have worked for years
in your clinical practice.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
And of course, we aren't
going into it right now,
but the Ring of Crystal lowers
free radical production.
Free radicals are the things
that ultimately kill your cells
and age you, too.
>>LISA: So there's a
whole anti-aging aspect
to this is as well.
>>SHEALY: Absolutely.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] You've pretty
much touched on everything.
So I want to hear from you
also via Facebook and Twitter.
If you had a type of pain that
you would want to get rid of
or to heal, what would that be?
So let us know.
And we can find out.
Maybe one of the things
that we could work on
in the next break.
We'll take a poll and see
what the main source of pain
is that people have out there.
And then get rid of it.
>>SHEALY: Banish it.
[BOTH LAUGH]
>>LISA: That's a good thing.
All right.
Dr. Norm Shealy is my guest.
And you have an amazing
amount of information.
So when we come
back, we'll be going
through some of these
points on your body.
So don't forget to get through
us to Facebook and Twitter.
We'll be right back.
>>LISA: Welcome back.
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
Welcome to "Gaiam Inspirations."
My guest today is
Dr. Norm Shealy,
neurosurgeon and creator
of the original TENS
unit for pain control
and management.
So far what we've talked
about is that there are many,
many ways and technologies
to be able to reduce
and quite often eliminate pain.
We just went through a
series of tapping exercises.
We're going to go
through a few more
that you'll get to
do along with us.
But I asked before the break,
what are some of the things
that you are
experiencing that you
would like to get rid
of in terms of pain?
And we've heard so far
from Bill on Facebook
is suffering from back pain,
that Sarah is basically
saying she's having trouble
sleeping, that a lot of people
were experiencing
the other rings.
I'm looking at the Facebook
responses right now.
And they had a lot
of great experience
from what we just did.
So it's working, which
is really good news.
A lot of people are feeling
very happy and very at ease.
And that's a good thing.
>>SHEALY: Yes, well,
for Bill, I would
say the most important
thing is magnesium.
Because 80% of people are
deficient in magnesium.
And if you don't have
enough magnesium,
the muscles go into spasm,
the cells get hyperactive.
>>LISA: Why are we so
deficient in magnesium?
>>SHEALY: Because
it's not in our soil.
Cattle farmers know
that if they do not
give their cattle
actual extra magnesium,
they die of gas staggers.
And so people will break
down in their weakest spot.
So muscle pain
especially is very
common in people who are
deficient in magnesium.
The best way to get it
is through the skin.
Magnesium chloride is
absorbed 10 to 20 times
better through the
skin than it is orally.
>>LISA: So magnesium lotions.
>>SHEALY: Yeah, the lotion
is much better than the oral.
Now in addition to that,
I strongly recommend yoga.
It's a fabulous
technique for back pain.
There's a tool-- I'm sure
if he's a gym person that he
knows about the Roman chair.
It's a thing, the pelvis
rests on this and you do this.
And this stretches the
muscles, relaxes the spine,
but also strengthens
the paraspinal muscles.
>>LISA: At the same time?
OK.
>>SHEALY: And of course
if that doesn't work,
obviously the TENS
device locally
around the area of pain.
And if that doesn't
work, then I'd
go to the Ring of Earth,
which is another of the rings.
It raises calcitonin-- 40 to 60
times as powerful as morphine.
>>LISA: Oh, all right.
Let's do that one.
Because that one--
yeah, a lot of people--
>>SHEALY: You start with the
only point, acupuncture point,
on the sole of the foot.
So it's right there
in that little area.
And where is that connected to?
What meridian is
that connected to?
>>SHEALY: Kidney 1.
>>LISA: Kidney 1, OK.
>>SHEALY: That's Kidney 1.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Then you go
outside the ankle bones,
behind the ankle
bone on the outside.
That's Bladder 60.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Then you come
up right in the middle
behind the knees, Bladder 54.
>>LISA: So are these good points
for digestive issues as well?
>>SHEALY: Well, yes,
although best for-- remember,
bladder is your genetic--
and kidney-- this
happens to do with
your total energy.
>>LISA: OK, OK.
>>SHEALY: Now, then you
come from here up here,
out behind the collarbone.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: And that is
Large Intestine 16.
>>LISA: And if that's sensitive
at all, what does that mean?
>>SHEALY: It should
be in most people.
>>LISA: OK, good.
>>SHEALY: There's muscles
there that are tender.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SHEALY: And then
you come over just
on the side of the
Eve's or Adam's Apple.
But here I don't tap, because
you're over the carotid artery.
I just take the skin and
pinch it hard, twist.
>>LISA: To increase
circu-- Try not
to talk when you're
doing that. [LAUGHS]
>>SHEALY: Well, that's
the physical pressure.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Then you
go on the muscle that
turns your head to
the side out here.
And you can tap there.
>>LISA: Are you
trying this at home?
OK.
>>SHEALY: And now you go
up to the very top center
of the head.
>>LISA: OK. [LAUGHS]
>>SHEALY: And that's
the Ring of Earth.
>>LISA: And that is
designed to simulate what?
>>SHEALY: Calcitonin.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Calcitonin helps you
put calcium into your bones.
So it prevents and
treats osteoporosis.
But also, because
calcitonin itself
is a pain reliever, 40 to 60
times as powerful as morphine,
it's phenomenal
for general pain.
>>LISA: For general pain.
So that's a great
one for general pain.
OK.
That's terrific.
Now I understand that you're
in the middle of a big research
project on back pain.
>>SHEALY: As a matter
of fact, I am doing one.
There's a company
called Life Wave,
and they make
acupuncture patches.
And they're homeopathic
patches that
feed back the infrared
heat coming off the body
and heat the acupuncture points.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
That's good news.
>>SHEALY: Well, they used
moxibustion over there.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>SHEALY: But these
work really well.
I've done several
studies on these patches
for different things,
like for insomnia.
The person had trouble sleeping.
There's one called
Silent Nights.
We got, even ina
double blind placebo
crossover study, 80%
increase in length of sleep.
>>LISA: You are kidding.
>>SHEALY: There's no
drug in the world that
can come close to that.
>>LISA: That could really
help a lot of people.
>>SHEALY: A lot of people.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
So that's basically
these points right here.
>>SHEALY: Well,
actually, it's only
on the right when you're
using the Silent Nights.
Right here, right here,
right here, here, or here.
You play with one of
those five points.
Most people find one of
them that's really good.
And some people
all of them work.
>>LISA: You have an amazing
amount of knowledge.
>>SHEALY: And that's just
one patch in that case.
Now, in the pain patches,
which is ice wave,
it takes two and
sometimes three.
You put one in the
center of the pain,
and then you sort of move around
to find the energetic flow.
But we're getting
remarkably good results.
In fact, our farm foreman had
shoulder surgery seven times
before he ever came to work
for me, terrible shoulder pain.
I put the patches on him
July a year and a half ago.
Within less than three
minutes, his pain was gone.
Gone.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SHEALY: After 20 years.
>>LISA: After that
many surgeries.
All right.
We're getting a lot of
questions for Dr. Norm
Shealy via Facebook.
Can you tap to boost
your metabolism?
Great question from
Tonya on Facebook.
>>SHEALY: Well, there of
course, you're wanting primarily
to reduce stress and
optimize thyroid function.
>>LISA: OK, so back
to the thyroid.
>>SHEALY: So there I would
use the Ring of Fire.
>>LISA: Do you think
thyroid is largely
misdiagnosed in this country?
>>SHEALY: Oh, yeah.
I think there are a
huge number of people
who have mild hypothyroidism.
Because, just as with
iodine, we're deficient.
Just as with magnesium,
we're deficient in iodine.
>>LISA: OK.
And some of the symptoms of
that are low energy, fatigue.
>>SHEALY: Elevated cholesterol.
Both high and low
blood pressure,
interestingly, weight
gain, of course.
And I did a study on this
15 years or more ago,
and we found everybody
was deficient in iodine--
in blood tests, urine
tests, that sort of thing.
So iodine itself
will help stimulate
the thyroid in some people.
And if that doesn't work, then
we add to it the Ring of Fire.
>>LISA: I've heard that people
with Hashimoto's, though,
should not use that.
>>SHEALY: That's right.
With Hashimoto's, that's
an autoimmune disease.
But you can certainly
use the Ring of Fire.
And there, I would also
use castor oil packs
over the thyroid.
>>LISA: The old castor
oil pack technique.
>>SHEALY: Old castor oil pack.
It is a local increase in detox.
>>LISA: Right, right.
So it pulls the toxins
out of the thyroid.
>>SHEALY: Lymph, yeah,
and into the lymph,
back into the
bloodstream and out.
>>LISA: Linda from
Facebook-- great question.
Can tapping help self-esteem?
>>SHEALY: If you're
doing it for self-esteem,
I would do the Ring of Air.
And the reason for that is--
>>LISA: And that's which one?
>>SHEALY: The Ring
of Air is the one
that raises neurotensin
and oxytocin.
And it's the one
where-- raising oxytocin
is what's important
for self-esteem.
>>LISA: That's makes
a lot of sense.
It's about connection.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
>>LISA: Right.
And that was the-- just
go through it real quick.
>>SHEALY: Starting at the
tip of the big toe here.
>>LISA: Out there, back--
>>SHEALY: Top to bottom.
>>LISA: Top to bottom of
the spine, these point here.
>>SHEALY: Here, base of
the skull, top center.
>>LISA: Once again,
you can see all of this
if you just go to GaiamTV.com.
You'll be able to see
the replay of this.
So we're covering a
lot of information.
So one of the listeners
as well from Twitter
is saying that this person had
a pinched nerve and headache.
>>SHEALY: Well, that
suggests something
in the cervical spine.
Now, depending upon
what's going on,
I mean if it truly is a pinched
nerve, it may need surgery.
There is a place,
still, for surgery.
I'd want a very
competent neurosurgeon
if it was a spinal
problem, myself.
But gentle stuff--
there's a very simple tool
I did two research projects
on called Posture Pump.
It puts a little thing
that helps extend the neck
and stretch the
spine-- extremely safe.
And that can help
a lot of people
with headache and neck pain.
>>LISA: In your practice,
in your clinical practice,
what is the biggest
complaint that you hear?
>>SHEALY: Depression.
>>LISA: Depression is
the biggest complaint.
>>SHEALY: Anxiety.
People don't complain about it
as much, but it's part of it.
And then some kind of pain,
but back pain is most common.
>>LISA: And these are
alternatives to talk therapy.
>>SHEALY: Well, yeah.
I have to admit I have a
Ph.D. in psychology, too.
>>LISA: That's right.
That's right.
>>SHEALY: But I think talk
therapy is for the birds,
not for people.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>SHEALY: I don't
think much of it.
It takes forever.
You'd do a lot more with EFT.
>>LISA: Well, I have
heard that, yes.
But there's something
to do-- that has
to be said for communicating
and talking about your problems.
>>SHEALY: For some people, yeah.
As Edgar Cayce said, if you
have this kind of personality,
you do that.
But I'm not impressed that
conventional, traditional talk
psychotherapy is nearly as
good as tap psychotherapy.
>>LISA: Wow.
What are some of
the tapping points
and the tapping meridians that--
>>SHEALY: Well--
>>LISA: This is for what?
>>SHEALY: Well, this is for
any kind of emotional state.
>>LISA: Right.
>>SHEALY: Repeat what you
want to do, what you're after.
Tap here, tap here,
tap here, tap here.
And then there are some others.
But those are the big ones.
>>SHEALY: For depression?
>>SHEALY: Oh, yeah.
Or anxiety.
I have a whole chapter on this
in my book "Energy Medicine."
>>LISA: Yes, yes, which you
are one of the pioneers of.
And so these are the
points in the body that
stimulate the meridians that
release anxiety and depression.
>>SHEALY: Right.
>>LISA: OK.
Again, going back to
your Facebook questions,
so Mel from New York
is saying what can he
do for stomach pain?
>>SHEALY: Well
obviously, you always
want to have a physician
make a diagnosis.
Stomach pain, I'd
want to know why.
You need to see a
physician and find out
whether you have a peptic
ulcer, for instance,
et cetera, et cetera.
>>LISA: That is a broad-- yeah.
>>SHEALY: And of course,
you could castor oil packs
over the pain.
It's good for all kinds
of abdominal pain.
That's one thing.
Deep relax-- autogenic
training would be superb.
>>LISA: Autogenic training.
OK, let's talk a
little bit about that.
>>SHEALY: Well, J. H. Shultz,
Johan H. Shultz, back in 1912
started research
on this technique
called autogenic training.
Wrote his first book in 1932.
By 1969, he begin the
first of six volumes
on autogenic training with
2,600 scientific references.
Autogenic training will
bring 80% of stress illnesses
under control.
But you've got to do it.
>>LISA: What is it?
>>SHEALY: It takes 18 minutes,
ideally, to do it well.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: My arms and
legs are heavy and warm.
>>LISA: So this is
a guided imagery?
>>SHEALY: A guided
imagery, words and imagery,
to create what you want.
>>LISA: And so that combination
of the words and imagery
basically move the body
just like the meridians.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
And it changes the physiology.
It changes the electricity
in the brain itself.
>>LISA: When you say there's
research studies around this,
what did the research
studies show?
>>SHEALY: 80% of
students do better.
80% of athletes do better.
80% of people with stress
illnesses, like peptic ulcer,
do better, and high blood
pressure, et cetera.
It quiets the stress
response and allows the body
to heal itself.
There's actually more published
research around this one tool
than almost all of
the others combined.
>>LISA: Really?
>>SHEALY: And it
is a fabulous tool.
The problem is it takes time.
It's that we're back to that
15 to 20 minute business
that a lot of
people will not do.
But it is one of my favorites.
>>LISA: So people would
rather stay in pain
rather than spend 18
minutes on an exercise?
Are you really saying that?
>>SHEALY: I am saying that.
I've seen it.
>>LISA: In what way?
>>SHEALY: People won't do it.
I'll never forget this one man.
Oh, yeah, doc, I'll do that.
>>LISA: Didn't do it.
>>SHEALY: Three months
later, I can't do that, doc.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Is it embarrassment?
Is it-- why?
>>SHEALY: It's just they
are not willing to focus
their attention on detaching.
>>LISA: What if it's because
they don't think it'll work?
>>SHEALY: Well, obviously
that's always part of it.
It's not a drug.
I have to do it.
You think it's all in my head.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] There's not
enough commercials around it.
>>SHEALY: That's right.
No side effects,
however, no publications.
>>LISA: There's not enough
people walking on the beach
saying we're going to be
great if you tap and do
this autogenic training.
>>SHEALY: You've got it.
>>LISA: Yeah,
that's interesting.
So there's a lack of hype
that doesn't give people
the belief that they need--
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
And I do this every day.
I personally do
autogenic training
and have since 1972,
every day of my life.
>>LISA: Well I want to
actually give you guys
the experience of the
autogenic training,
but I want to get to a
few more questions here.
Terry on Facebook is feeling
very stressed, especially
from the holidays.
There's a lot of
post-holiday stress,
especially before
going to sleep,
particularly people that lost
loved ones around the holidays
and so forth.
>>SHEALY: That is always
difficult, believe me.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>SHEALY: Well, interestingly,
Bliss applied at bedtime
to the Ring of Air points is
phenomenal for deep sleep.
But doing the Ring of
Air will quiet the system
with the tapping.
And of course
autogenic training,
you could put yourself to
sleep with autogenic training.
>>LISA: And that's the
self-talk that we're
going to go through
in just a second.
>>SHEALY: Exactly.
>>LISA: All right.
So we want to actually
do a little demonstration
of what the autogenic
training is.
And I want you to
take us through it.
And I want you to listen
at home and just listen
to what Dr. Shealy is saying
and how this registers with you
and what your experience is.
And please communicate back
with us on Facebook and Twitter
so I can read some of
your responses on the air.
>>SHEALY: So make yourself
comfortable, physically as
comfortably as you can.
Close your eyes.
Take a deep breath.
And let it go.
And as you breathe
in, say to yourself,
my arms and legs--
as you breathe out--
are heavy and warm.
My arms and legs
As you say the words,
create an image
of the sun beaming down
upon your arms and legs,
warming them pleasantly
through and through.
My arms and legs
are heavy and warm,
words and images
create feelings.
My arms and legs
are heavy and warm.
And as you breathe
in-- my heartbeat--
as you breathe out--
is calm and regular.
My heartbeat is
calm and regular.
Create a picture of
something calm and regular,
like a metronome or the
pendulum of a clock.
My heartbeat is
calm and regular.
The first time you
practice this, the blood
pressure and pulse decrease 10%.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SHEALY: My breathing
is free and easy.
My breathing is free and easy.
I like the image of a bird
gliding through the air
without having to
beat its wings.
But any image that
feels right is fine.
My breathing is free and easy.
Feel how easy, automatic.
My abdomen is warm.
And here, imagine
the sun beaming
down up on your abdomen,
warming it through and through.
My abdomen is warm.
My forehead is cool.
Imagine you're outside,
warmly dressed,
but a pleasant, cool breeze is
blowing across your forehead.
Because the blood,
when you relax,
goes back to your hands and body
rather than into your brain.
My forehead is cool.
My forehead it's cool.
My mind is quiet and still.
Create an image of something
pleasantly quiet and still.
Sense, see, feel, convert
those words and images
into experience.
My mind is quiet and still.
Now even that brief one
will begin the process.
And you can extend the
number of repetitions longer.
Then when you reach
that stage, you
can sort of go through the
body and feel any area that's
still out of balance, whether
you've got discomfort, anything
that's just not right.
Talk to that part.
Like Dr. Dolittle,
talk to the animals.
Talk to the body.
My back--
>>LISA: I was just
going to say, yeah.
>>SHEALY: --is comfortable.
My back is comfortable.
Create an image of yourself
being totally relaxed
and smiling because
of your back.
>>LISA: What about
that little voice
that comes up in your head
saying no, my back is in pain.
What do you do with that voice?
>>SHEALY: OK, it's like
"don't chase white bears."
They don't exist very often
except at the North Pole.
If you're sitting and
meditating on top of a mountain
and a train goes
down in the valley,
you're not going to jump on
the train and go with it.
So you have to train yourself to
detach from those thoughts that
don't belong where you are.
That's part of the
whole training,
is to keep your
attention focused
on what you're
wanting to create.
So it's OK.
Don't get annoyed.
Just start over.
My arms and legs
are heavy and warm.
My heartbeat's calm and regular.
>>LISA: So if your mind
starts to get distracted--
>>SHEALY: That's OK.
>>LISA: Start again.
>>SHEALY: Just come
right back to it.
>>LISA: And why is the
emphasis on the warmth?
>>SHEALY: Well,
actually, because Shultz
found that when people were
put into a hypnotic trance,
the first thing that happens
is the hands become warm.
And then they begin
to feel heavy,
the way as if you're
going to drift
into the mattress, that heavy
feeling of deep relaxation.
And then the next
thing they feel
is calming of the heartbeat.
And that's what happens.
>>LISA: This is amazing to do
if you're in a work environment
and it's stressful.
Or I've heard that women's
stress hormones raise
when they come home from work,
because there's more work
to do when you get home.
As opposed to men, whose drop.
So this is a great
opportunity for women to--
>>SHEALY: Once you've
done this for a few weeks,
then you may only have to repeat
each phrase a couple times
to get a quick experience.
>>LISA: Now, can it also be
used for peak performance?
You said that athletes
use this before--
>>SHEALY: That's right.
I mean, I worked
with a football team
at the University of Wisconsin
La Crosse back in the '70s.
They had been the
bottom of their league.
They were not good.
I gave them just six
sessions in guided imagery
and this kind of
stuff for what to do,
and they were co-champions.
>>LISA: See, this is
what I love about this
is that it's something
that you can do at home.
You can do, whatever
your situation.
And it's extremely
cost effective.
But it's all about awareness.
It's about flipping
the switch of what
it is that your options are and
your choices are around pain,
depression, and various--
not only techniques
and technologies out
there, but there's things
that you can have in
your mental toolkit.
>>SHEALY: Again, at least
85% of all illnesses
are stress illnesses.
>>LISA: Yes.
I've heard higher.
>>SHEALY: Well, about 15%--
>>LISA: But you're
the physician, so--
>>SHEALY: Well, you
know, some things happen
and you can't pin them down.
And they're more serious.
And they need drugs or surgery.
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
>>SHEALY: But the 85% are the
ones that can be recovering
and totally cured
without drugs or surgery.
>>LISA: Some of those--
yes, exactly, the, quote,
incurables where you can
actually make a difference.
And it's also empowering
because you're doing something,
rather than getting
a life sentence
saying there's nothing
that can be done.
That's not empowering.
>>SHEALY: Well, as a matter
of fact, the vast majority
of pains that I saw for 30 years
were people who had been told,
you've got to learn
to live with it.
People don't learn
>>LISA: Right, exactly.
One of our Facebook questions
is, is this OK while driving?
Paul wants to know.
>>SHEALY: Ah!
>>LISA: In heavy rush
hour traffic, he asks.
>>SHEALY: No, no.
All you can do when
you're doing-- you've
got to pay attention.
But you can just
slowly deep breathe.
>>LISA: OK.
>>SHEALY: Don't do
any visualization
other than watching the road.
>>LISA: Right.
What about Frances,
who is feeling
an asthma attack coming on?
Will this help?
>>SHEALY: Now, asthma is
one of those things where
the autonomic nervous system
is really out of balance.
And if I were
working with her, I
would have her start with all
the phrases except breathing.
Do all the other five phrases
first for a couple of weeks,
and then add the
breathing component.
>>LISA: So that she can work
with the breathing later.
>>SHEALY: Yes.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
So relax the body
first and then--
>>SHEALY: Relax the
body and the mind
and the heart and everything.
And then the body's
gotten accustomed to it,
and then you can start
talking to the breathing.
>>LISA: You're amazing.
And thank you so much
for all of your options
that you've brought
us and the awareness
that you've brought with us.
And if you want to watch
more of this interview
with Dr. Norm Shealy,
go to GaiamTV.com.
You can sign up for a free
trial subscription right there.
Thank you so much.
>>SHEALY: My pleasure, Lisa.
>>LISA: Oh, absolutely.
Thank you so much
for joining me.
This is Lisa Garr.
You've been listening
to "Gaiam Inspirations."